---
title: 'A Hierarchical Cascade of Second Messengers Regulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa Surface Behaviors'
slug: 10.1128~mBio.02456-14
date: 2015-02-27
journal: 'mBio'
author: '[{"given":"Yun","family":"Luo","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Kun","family":"Zhao","isGerard":false,"isMember":true,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Amy E.","family":"Baker","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Sherry L.","family":"Kuchma","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Kimberly A.","family":"Coggan","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Matthew C.","family":"Wolfgang","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Gerard C. L.","family":"Wong","isGerard":true,"isMember":true,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"George A.","family":"O’Toole","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false}]'
hasAbstract: true
pdf: /pdfs/10.1128~mBio.02456-14.pdf
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/mbio.02456-14


tags: ['mBio', 'Virology', 'Microbiology']
---
<!--truncate-->
### Abstract
<jats:title>ABSTRACT </jats:title>

Biofilms are surface-attached multicellular communities. Using single-cell tracking microscopy, we showed that a
_pilY1_
mutant of
<jats:named-content content-type="genus-species">Pseudomonas aeruginosa</jats:named-content>
is defective in early biofilm formation. We leveraged the observation that PilY1 protein levels increase on a surface to perform a genetic screen to identify mutants altered in surface-grown expression of this protein. Based on our genetic studies, we found that soon after initiating surface growth, cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels increase, dependent on PilJ, a chemoreceptor-like protein of the Pil-Chp complex, and the type IV pilus (TFP). cAMP and its receptor protein Vfr, together with the FimS-AlgR two-component system (TCS), upregulate the expression of PilY1 upon surface growth. FimS and PilJ interact, suggesting a mechanism by which Pil-Chp can regulate FimS function. The subsequent secretion of PilY1 is dependent on the TFP assembly system; thus, PilY1 is not deployed until the pilus is assembled, allowing an ordered signaling cascade. Cell surface-associated PilY1 in turn signals through the TFP alignment complex PilMNOP and the diguanylate cyclase SadC to activate downstream cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) production, thereby repressing swarming motility. Overall, our data support a model whereby P. aeruginosa senses the surface through the Pil-Chp chemotaxis-like complex, TFP, and PilY1 to regulate cAMP and c-di-GMP production, thereby employing a hierarchical regulatory cascade of second messengers to coordinate its program of surface behaviors.


**IMPORTANCE**
Biofilms are surface-attached multicellular communities. Here, we show that a stepwise regulatory circuit, involving ordered signaling via two different second messengers, is required for
<jats:named-content content-type="genus-species">Pseudomonas aeruginosa</jats:named-content>
to control early events in cell-surface interactions. We propose that our studies have uncovered a multilayered “surface-sensing” system that allows P. aeruginosa to effectively coordinate its surface-associated behaviors
_._
Understanding how cells transition into the biofilm state on a surface may provide new approaches to prevent formation of these communities.