---
title: 'Mapping membrane activity in undiscovered peptide sequence space using machine learning'
slug: 10.1073~pnas.1609893113
date: 2016-11-14
journal: 'Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences'
author: '[{"orcid":"http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5144-2552","given":"Ernest Y.","family":"Lee","isGerard":false,"isMember":true,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Benjamin M.","family":"Fulan","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"given":"Gerard C. L.","family":"Wong","isGerard":true,"isMember":true,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false},{"orcid":"http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8829-9726","given":"Andrew L.","family":"Ferguson","isGerard":false,"isMember":false,"isFirst":false,"isCorresponding":false}]'
hasAbstract: true
pdf: /pdfs/10.1073~pnas.1609893113.pdf
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1609893113


tags: ['Proc Natl Acad Sci USA', 'Multidisciplinary']
---
<!--truncate-->
### Abstract
There are some ∼1,100 known antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), which permeabilize microbial membranes but have diverse sequences. Here, we develop a support vector machine (SVM)-based classifier to investigate ⍺-helical AMPs and the interrelated nature of their functional commonality and sequence homology. SVM is used to search the undiscovered peptide sequence space and identify Pareto-optimal candidates that simultaneously maximize the distance_σ_from the SVM hyperplane (thus maximize its “antimicrobialness”) and its ⍺-helicity, but minimize mutational distance to known AMPs. By calibrating SVM machine learning results with killing assays and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), we find that the SVM metric_σ_correlates not with a peptide’s minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), but rather its ability to generate negative Gaussian membrane curvature. This surprising result provides a topological basis for membrane activity common to AMPs. Moreover, we highlight an important distinction between the maximal recognizability of a sequence to a trained AMP classifier (its ability to generate membrane curvature) and its maximal antimicrobial efficacy. As mutational distances are increased from known AMPs, we find AMP-like sequences that are increasingly difficult for nature to discover via simple mutation. Using the sequence map as a discovery tool, we find a unexpectedly diverse taxonomy of sequences that are just as membrane-active as known AMPs, but with a broad range of primary functions distinct from AMP functions, including endogenous neuropeptides, viral fusion proteins, topogenic peptides, and amyloids. The SVM classifier is useful as a general detector of membrane activity in peptide sequences.